`txt2sil.py` is a script that converts a formatted text file into a SILE file.
The idea is to use text files as a reliable format to store information.
This can be done with different markups, and in this case `pandoc` is a suitable tool.
However, it lacks some features.
E.g., comments, though it can be implemented as a plugin.
Another desirable feature is to generate PDFs using SILE, a lightweight typesetter.
Or include files into a `main` document.
This, and more, is what `txt2sil` does.


# Dependencies

- `SILE` to produce PDF documents from the generated files
- `bibmanager` (a program from my repositories) to generate citations from bibtex references
- `slides.lua` (another repository from me) to generate slides

# Format

## Header

The header is a section of the text enclosed by `---` lines.
It is used to set variables and change options.
For example,

```
title: My Title
margins: 2cm
```

sets the document title, and the page margins.
Any setting can be used throughout the document.
It is possible to set, e.g. `name: John Doe`, and then use `@name` in the text.

Although it is expect to have a header at the top of the text, so that the options set are effective from the beginning, it is also possible to have a 'header' in any place of the document.
In fact, it is possible to have multiple 'headers', setting options for a particular place.


## Counters

A counter variable is defined in the text using the syntax `#category:label`.
If a category already has previous items, 'item' will receive the next number.
`@category:label` is the syntax used to get the counter value; if it does not exists, it is then defined and returned.
E.g., in a blank document,

```
Figure @fig:A and Figure @fig:B,
#tab:A Table @tab:B
```

will result in `Figure 1 and Figure 2, Table 2`


## Citations

Citations can be made if a `bibliography` file is set in the header.
They are called using the syntax `@key` (usually by author/year pairs, `@Author2021`).
Grouped citations are made with `[@key1, @key2]`


## Text styles

- `*text*` for bold text
- `_text_` for italic text
- `+text+` for underlined text
- `-text-` for strickedout text
- `=text=` for highlighted text
- `^text^` for superscript text
- `~text~` for subscript text
- "`code`" for code

These marks can be applied to enclosed pieces of text, as shown above, or in two other ways:

- `^** line` to format an entire line
- `^***` begin/end formatted block of lines


## Sections

The format adopted for the text file was based on the `djot` markup wherever possible.
The text may be formatted with the following marks (`^` refers to the beginning of the line):

- `^#` defines a section, up to 4 levels. If the document has a title, `#` sets a heading of level 1; otherwise, it sets the document title
- `^#:` forces section number; by the way, `^#:label` also stores the section number in a counter, that may be later used in the text as `@sec:label`
- `^#-` ommits section number
- `^\t` indent the line
- `^%` comment the line (i.e., it will be ommited from the output)
- `%%%` marks the beginning/end of comments block


## Math

SILE has a package to print math equations.
For inline equations, the syntax `$a=b+c$` is used;
displaymath equations are generated by enclosing it with `$$` pairs.
A starting `$$:` will generate a numbered displaymath, and `$$:label` will enable to use its number with `@eq:label`.


## Includes

Files may be included into the document using the syntax:

`^<< filename`

The extension is checked to decide if it is included as an image, as a table (`.tab`, `.csv`), or if it is inserted as a portion of text.
Tables and images may have captions, defined as

`: A caption text.`

Captions may be present before or after tables and figures.
The object number may be stored in a variable, through the syntax:

`:label A caption text.`

Then, `@tab:label` or `@fig:label` may be used, according to the object type.


## Tables

A table is defined by a line surrounded by bars, e.g.:

`| col0 | col1 | ... |`

Additional rows are inserted by lines with similar syntax.


## Other formattings

- `^ŌÉŻ*20` or `<tab>*5` to center lines
- `^>ŌÉŻ` to make quotes; '>' must be followed by a space (using NBSP will produce a list)
- `^<ŌÉŻ` to make left quotes
- `^|ŌÉŻ` to make quotes preserving the line breaks
- `^[-+*>┬¦_]ŌÉŻ` to make a list, with different symbols (`_` for a list without any symbol); the identation will set the list level
- `^ *[0-9].` to make a numbered list; the symbols `<[(]` and `[)]>` may be used to delimit the list number
- `^K` (the 'vertical tab' character) for a `\vfill`
- `^F` (the 'form feed' character) for a new page
- `^[note]` to insert a note (footnote or endnote)
- `--` for a en-dash, ŌĆō
- `---` for a em-dash, ŌĆö
- `...` for an elipsis, ŌĆ”


# Options

These options, set in the header, may affect the document visual

- `class`: the type of the document: `plain` for text documents, `slides` for presentations, and `poster` for posters (this last is incomplete)
- `lang`: the document language; it affects the hyphanization, and some labels
- `papersize`: self describing
- `indent`: the space before the first line of each paragraph
- `parskip`: the space between paragraphs
- `lineskip`: the space between lines
- `listskip`: the space between list items
- `slidesize`: the size of slides
- `margins`: the space from page borders to the text (it may be a comma-separated list of values)
- `quotemargins`: the extra margin size applied to quotes
- `columns`: the number of columns of the document
- `font`: the font used in the text; just the font size may be set
- `titlefont`: the font used in titles
- `monofont`: the font used for code
- `decorfont`: the font used for the first letter of paragraphs (default: none)
- `title`: the document title
- `subtitle`: a subtitle text
- `subsubtitle`: an extra text
- `ornament`: an image to be displayed after the title
- `authtitle`: if present, this option indicates that the author name is to be printed as subtitle
- `datetitle`: to print the date (formatted by datefmt) as sub-subtitle
- `titlestyle`: the style of the title
- `stitlestyle`: the style of the subtitle
- `sstitlestyle`: the style of the sub-subtitle
- `secstyle`: the style of the section
- `ssecstyle`: the style of the subsection
- `sssecstyle`: the style of the sub-subsection
- `ssssecstyle`: the style of the sub-sub-subsection
- `toc`: if present, it indicates that the table of contents is to be printed
- `ntitle`: indicates the format of title numbering (default: none)
- `nini`: to set the initial number of sections counter
- `nsections`: the format used to number section and subsections
- `nequations`: to set if all equations are numbered (default: yes)
- `notefmt`: the format used to number notes
- `datefmt`: the format for dates, stored in @date variable
- `bibliography`: the bibfile containing references
- `bibstyle`: the style for references
- `citstyle`: the style for citations (authoryear, number, super)
- `cover`: the image to be displayed as the cover of the document
- `enditems`: a comma-separated list of the items to be present at the end of the document: notes, figures and/or tables
- `highlightids`: indicates if unknown labels (called by `@label`) are to be highlighted or ignored
- `nestedsecs`: indicates if section numbers are to be concatenated to parent section numbers
- `curlyquotes`: indicates if single and double quotes are to be transformed in curly quotes
- `replace`: a list of pairs of strings to be replaced in the document (e.g., '-----,\\noindent\\hrulefill')
- `packages`: a list of the packages to be included in the SILE document

Switches are variables which only they presence affects the parser behaviour, regardless of any value set.
They are: authtitle, datetitle, sectitle, nequations, curlyquotes, highlightids, nestedsecs, resetnotes, draft.
Switches valid only for slides are: transitionslides, rulefolios, vcenter, printnotes
Switches can be 'unset' by defining a no-switch variable, e.g. `noauthtitle`
